## Observers, Complexity, and the Scientific Method

The observer, or agent with an effect on the objects of measurement, have been considered from a wide range of perspectives, including Quantum Physics/Information to Philosophy. In the present submission, we utilize an agent-based approach to analyze the role of observers in phenomenology and scientific empiricism. We argue that the observation, mental simulation, and interpretation of phenomena cannot be considered separately since they are all products of embeddedness in a complex natural system. Thus, an agent-based representation must include individual observers that are both cognitively and biologically sophisticated. Thus, the observer perspective as defined here can be utilized along with concepts such as internal regulation of single observers and intersubjectivity between observers to achieve novel ways of measuring and interpreting statistical phenomena. To demonstrate how cognitive and biological sophistication can be achieved, we will also discuss the potential for embodiment in agent-based models that treat the empirical world as a sensory world. To demonstrate how these features can be incorporated into agent-based models, we turn our attention towards two model systems: genotype-phenotype representations and morphogenetic agents. These two phenomena are chosen not only for their relevance to the role of an egocentric observer, but also as relationships of interest to the social and biological sciences. The representational structure of genotype-phenotype representations feature both a vertical and horizontal approximation of biological diversity. The vertical component of this representation provides each agent in a population with a unique genetic identity that is expressed to generate a phenotype, which in turn interacts with the agent’s specific location in an environment. As each agent observes the environment from a unique point of view, the horizontal component involves interactions between all agents in the population, providing a structured population that can approximate crowdsourced knowledge and collective behaviors. In the case of morphogenetic agents, combining pattern recognizing and pattern emitting components into an individual observer with a common internal representation allows us to model morphogenesis not only as a process internal to the agent, but also as a co-evolutionary process between agents. This type of representation unifies the processes of perception/cognition and pattern formation in the same agent, and then places them in a population of like agents. Morphogenetic agents allow us to achieve parallel hybrid representations that combine observational processes with generative processes. As a consequence of these properties, genotype-phenotype representations and morphogenetic agents allow us to approach long standing scientific questions in new ways: we will consider how our model systems enable novel approaches to the scientific method, including building hypotheses from cumulative effects and interactivity.
